### Code Book

This code book contains:

(1) a short description of the available data for use in the Coursera Getting and Cleaning Data Class Assignment

(2) an explanation as to which data is used to complete the assignment tasks

(3) a list of steps indicating how the tidy dataset can be generated.

## Summary of the collected data

The experiment utilized a pool of thirty individual volunteers who were asked to perform six different activities while carrying a smartphone. Each person was required to carry a smartphone during the experiment so that quantitative analysis could be performed on the capcity of these instruments to capture meaningful data about the movements of individuals wearing such devices. To determine if the data collected would be useful for human activity recognition reequired the experimenters to retrive and analyize the raw data  from the smartphones worn by the volunteers.

## Listed here is a brief description of the file and subfolder directory structure held in the master "UCI HAR Dataset" folder. These files and directories contain all the training and test datasets associated with the [Human Activity Recognition Project](http://archive.ics.uci.edu/ml/datasets/Human+Activity+Recognition+Using+Smartphones):

`README.txt` =  detailed description of experiment and associated files

`activity_labels.txt`= labels 1 through6 for WALKING, WALKING_UPSTAIRS, WALKING_DOWNSTAIRS, SITTING, STANDING, LAYING links classs with activity name

`features_info.txt` = feature selection and variables used in the study. Time and frequency domain records kept.

`features.txt` = features broken out into 561 components

`train/X_train.txt` = training dataset contains 7352 rows by 561 cols of smartphone data, for 21 of 30 total volunteers

`train/y_train.txt` = training labels for X_train.txt, the set contains one column over 7352 rows of feature observation data by activity type

`train/subject_train.txt` = training vector set for X_train.txt of ID data for a set of 21 out of a total of 30 volunteers identified by number. The data is one column over 7352 rows

`train/Inertial Signals/body_acc_x_train.txt` = not used to complete assignment

`train/Inertial Signals/body_acc_y_train.txt` = not used to complete assignment

`train/Inertial Signals/body_acc_z_train.txt` = not used to complete assignment

`train/Inertial Signals/body_gyro_x_train.txt` = not used to complete assignment

`train/Inertial Signals/body_gyro_y_train.txt` = not used to complete assignment

`train/Inertial Signals/body_gyro_z_train.txt` = not used to complete assignment

`train/Inertial Signals/total_acc_x_train.txt` = not used to complete assignment

`train/Inertial Signals/total_acc_y_train.txt` = not used to complete assignment

`train/Inertial Signals/total_acc_z_train.txt` = not used to complete assignment

`test/X_test.txt` = test dataset contains 2947 rows by 561 cols of smartphone data, for 9 of 30 total volunteers.

`test/y_test.txt` = test labels for X_test.txt, the set contains one column vector with 2947 rows of feature observation data by activity type

`test/subject_test.txt` = test vector set for X_text.txt of ID data for 9 out of a total of 30 volunteers identified by number. The data is one column over 2947 rows

`test/Inertial Signals/body_acc_x_test.txt` = not used to complete assignment

`test/Inertial Signals/body_acc_y_test.txt` = not used to complete assignment

`test/Inertial Signals/body_acc_z_test.txt` = not used to complete assignment

`test/Inertial Signals/body_gyro_x_test.txt` = not used to complete assignment
 
`test/Inertial Signals/body_gyro_y_test.txt` = not used to complete assignment

`test/Inertial Signals/body_gyro_z_test.txt` = not used to complete assignment

`test/Inertial Signals/total_acc_x_test.txt` = not used to complete assignment

`test/Inertial Signals/total_acc_y_test.txt` = not used to complete assignment

`test/Inertial Signals/total_acc_z_test.txt` = not used to complete assignment

### Step-by-step method used for completing the assignment:

1. Data files required for project completion were read into data.tables and all column headers were labeled appropriately. Also the training and test datasets were merged.

2. All feature columns were retained if they contained the string "mean()" or "std()". This yields a total of 66 feature columns. Added SubjectID and ActivityID to the data.table

3. The Subject ID and ActivityID columns used to assign an appropriate labels for describing subjects and their related activity.

4. A tidy dataset was generated by extraction of measurements by the mean and standard deviation for each measurement. hence, each subject has 6 rows in the tidy dataset, asssociated with one activity type. Each row also includes the mean value for each of the 66 features connected with a particular subject-activity pairing. The tidy dataset contains a total of 180 rows outputted into the CSV file included here in this repository.
